---
layout: post
title: Simple Made Easy
---

[Video](https://www.infoq.com/presentations/Simple-Made-Easy)

## Summary

I have mentioned this talk to almost everyone I have ever talked to about engineering. This talk represents the core of the job, and it's crucial to grok it. My normal advice is to watch the talk, leave it a couple of days, and then watch it again.

One of the driving features in the talk (as the title suggests) is the difference between 'simple' and 'easy'. In English these are often used synonymously, but by splitting them back to their derivations we can draw more accurate conclusions about what our goals should be when building software/systems.

### Simple

sim-plex: **One fold/braid**  
Opposite __complex__

The root of simplicity is the idea of __one__ -- for me, particularly, one concept. The critical issue is that we are not interleaving different concepts together. We are not concerned about counting technical aspects -- for example, there is nothing wrong with an interface that has 100 functions, as long as all of those functions relate to one (and __only__ one) concept. A 1-concept 100-function interface is infinitely more useful than a 2-concept 1-function interface.

Hickey claims that simple is an objective issue. One can look at a definition and determine whether multiple concepts are involved. This will contrast to easiness.

### Easy

ease < aise < adjacens: **lie near**  
Opposite __hard__

Hickey gives three (or two and a half) different ways for something to be easy. The first is "near at hand": I already have it installed; it's in my package manager. The second is "near to our understanding": I've worked with this programming language before; I built a system that looks a bit like this before.

These two definitions of easy guide a huge amount of the work that we do. As long as we can get something up and running as soon as we look at it we'll go with it, even if it is terrible (see MongoDB). We also work on the negative of this: we decide that we will __not__ use something because we have heard it is difficult, or otherwise specifically __because__ we do not already know it.

> In addition, we're fixated on, oh, I can't; I can't read that. Now I can't read German. Does that mean German is unreadable? No. I don't know German.

The third (or 2.5th) type of easiness is "near our capabilities". Because the work we do is conceptual we find very few people willing to say they are not capable of understanding (/learning) something. In reality this is not so important, as the range of our capabilities is very small (we are all very similar).

These definitions add up to show us that "easy" is a relative definition (as opposed to "simple"). It is easy for Germans to read German, but not for me. This is the main driver for being clear about the distinction between simple and easy: one might say "I like this technology because it is simple". What they really mean is it is easy (for them) because they have been working with it for some time. In this way the qualities of software turn into a subjective conversation, from what __should__ be an objective one.
